So, the shipwreck, pollen then doesn't melt when it gets wet.
No.
Pollen is a really good material.
Pollen is one of the more durable materials made in nature.
We have been able to find pollen, actually, or, well, pollen or spores made of the same material.
nearly two billion years old.
They go all the way back to the Kakabikia pepper shale of South Africa, which actually dates from the Precambrian.
But anyway, pollen is very durable.
It will oxidize and will get destroyed, but in many deposits it remains very well preserved.
So what happens is when you have a cargo, let's say of wheat,
or you have a cargo of grapes or wine, pollen gets trapped in those commodities.
And even though the seeds have been eaten up by sea life or been oxidized or destroyed or disintegrated, the pollen doesn't, and it stays behind.
So by analyzing the pollen in shipwreck sites, in some cases we were able to tell what cargoes they were carrying,
what kind of foods that were being eaten as evidenced by materials in the bilge, which was of course a common dumping ground in historic times in ships.
Occasionally we can even find evidence of perhaps where the ship came from in terms of pollen that might have gotten into the ship at ports of call or from its origin.
We also looked at commodities.
a type of commodity called terebin, T-E-R-E-B-I-N-T-H, which is like frankincense and myrrh.
It is a type of incense that during, oh, way back in the ancient kingdoms of Egypt and so forth were a very highly prized commodity.
It was also used in embalming.
It comes, it's a sap from the pistachio tree.
Anyway, they found a shipwreck site off the coast of Turkey that had a
large amount of this terebinth.
And we analyzed some of the terebinth because it is sap, because it is sticky, kind of like sugar maple syrup.
Pollen that would be blowing around in the air would get trapped on this sticky surface and become incorporated in the terebinth.
So we analyzed the terebinth.
And based on our analysis, we concluded that it probably came from an area in Upper Jordan or Lower Syria.
So, based on the types of pollen we found in the terabinth and what was in those regions at that time, that's where we conclude it probably came from.
Well, these are the kind of things that we can gather from shipwreck sites.
The other thing, one of my students who worked on the Betsy, the HMS Betsy,
which was a ship that was a supply ship for Cornwallis at Yorktown.
And this ship was sunk, purposely sunk, just before the siege ended in an attempt to try to block the Potomac River for the French fleet that was shelling them, and they didn't want to get any closer.
An analysis of the Betsy, looking at all of the pollen and everything, turns out it shows that this ship was a supply ship, and it was probably used for quartering horses.
There was a lot of old pollen on there and other commodities.
It looked like it was a storage.
It was basically a storage vessel used to store a lot of commodities.
But they believed that a lot of it had to do with probably quartering cavalry horses and so forth like that.
But anyway, so this is something that we've been pioneering as well.
And then, of course, along the way, we've worked very closely with people in geology.
In fact, I've been the co-chair of five PhDs in geology in which people have used palynology.
of primarily tertiary deposits in an effort to understand paleo environments during the tertiary, or lignite deposits, particularly associated with some of the deposits around here at lower eurcene and so forth.
In fact, I worked with Bob Berg on, remember when they drilled that great big
on campus.
They dropped a 23,000 foot rig core.
Well, you know, I got to look at some of the samples that went through the tertiary deposits in that core.
So, yeah, we've kept pretty active.
We have a fairly extensive pollen collection here, mainly because I've been fortunate as these oil companies have consolidated and have, well, gone out of business, if you want to call it that.
Mobile Oil spent 20 years developing and processing pollen to develop a reference collection of modern pollen types
of about eight or nine thousand taxa from all over the world.
A person sometimes doesn't appreciate what this really means because if you want to make a pollen slide, if you want to do a slide of pollen, this is what it involves.
The first thing you have to do is you have to go find a plant that is in flower.
So that means you have to go there at the right time of the year and find the flower.
The next thing is you have to make absolutely positive that the plant is identified correctly to genus and species.
Now that you know that for certain what planted is and you have the flower, you then have to take it into a laboratory and spend about six or seven hours processing it using chemicals such as nitric acid, sulfuric acid, hydrochloric acid, and so forth in order to remove all of the exceperaneous material, the debris, the cellulose, cytoplasm, waxes, lipids, all of that kind of stuff, to leave only the pollen
itself, the outer wall of the pollen grain.
Then you have to mount it on the slide.
Okay, now, if you have to do that for 8,000 different taxa, imagine how much it costs, you know, in terms of time and effort and money.
Well, Mobile Oil, when they merged with Exxon, they had this big collection, and I was fortunate enough to know some people in Mobile, and they donated it to Texas A&M University.
It had a conservative estimated tax write-off of $750,000.
That was valuing each slide at $10.
Oh, my.
Yes.
And I don't think you could make a slide for $10.
But anyway, then when BP and Exxon merged, was it Amoco?
No.
BP Amoco.
BP Amoco merged.
Yeah, it was ExxonMobil.
When BP Amoco merged, the Amoco office in Houston had a collection of almost equal size because, of course, these oil companies weren't going to share with each other.
So they had a massive collection, which fortunately I knew some people in Amoco.
So we got that collection as well.
So we've got the mobile collection and the Amoco collection.
And then, in addition to that, there was a botanist by the name of Meredith Lear, L-I-E-U-X, who taught at LSU for about 10 or 15 years, and was a real pioneer in the area of malicious polynology, or honey pollen, and developed a collection of about 1,250 taxa just from Louisiana.
and uh one thing led to another she didn't uh well she didn't get tenure that's the bottom line uh she said she was run out because of the old boy network and so forth and i don't know the story but she's an environmental lawyer now but nevertheless
She donated her collection to Texas A&M as well.
So we have those three collections, in addition to all of the materials that we personally have been making over the last 30 years.
So we have one of the best collections, I seriously guess, probably one of the ten best collections in the world of Pollen Taxa.
And why is this important?
For one thing, if you're going to do forensics, you've got to have this.
And I've had some very interesting cases in forensics.
I'll just give you a couple.
I got a sample from New Zealand one day.
A friend of mine in New Zealand sent me a sample because somebody in New Zealand had bought 250,000 pounds of honey, which was supposed to be from Canada.
They bought it from a Canadian distributor, and it was supposed to be Canadian clover honey.
Well, the guy that bought all of the stuff for, of course, packaging and resale in New Zealand tasted it and said that he didn't think it tasted like Canadian clover honey.
But he couldn't tell for sure.
So he sent a sample to some police office in New Zealand, which then sent it to some palynologist in New Zealand who said, I don't know anything about Canadian flora.
They sent it to me, and we've done quite a bit of research in Canada.
So I looked at the sample, and it was not Canadian.
It was Chinese.
There's no question about it.
They had a lot of...
pollen types in there which can be found in China and very few that would be found in Canada so I wrote them back and said what you've got is 250,000 pounds of Chinese hunting I don't care whether it came from Canada or not that's what you've got so that's but the point I'm making is if I did not have a good collection of flora from all over the world and had some of these Chinese types that I could key out from looking at these samples I couldn't have done that
Now, you all are quartered today in what area?
You mean, where do we live?
Yeah.
Well, we were gypsies for quite a while.
We were in the Agricultural Building, I mean, I'm sorry, the Agronomy Building for a while, YMCA Building for a while.
Then we moved to Bolton, and then from Bolton we went to Dooley Bell for a while.
And from Dooley Bell we finally were moved into our own building.
We now live in the Anthropology Building, which was originally
the engineering building back in the days.
In fact, the departmental office is in the office in the area that one time Calhoun occupied when he was dean of geosciences.
In the very early days of geosciences, that was the engineering building.
In fact, aerospace engineering, I think.
Now, when did you all move to that building?
That was in the early 90s, like 1993, 1994, around and near somewhere.
And prior to that, we had a real problem.
And one of the problems that separated Nautical from anthropology, in addition to the unequal pay, in addition to the 12-month appointments, and in addition to the fact that all of the Nautical faculty have some type of endowed professorship or endowed chair,
whereas none of the anthropologists do.
But anyway, the other thing that separated us physically, and that's not talking money, but I mean physical, was the fact that Nautical, for a number of years, was housed out at the Riverside campus, which we affectionately called the Annex, in old barracks buildings.
And the reason was we did not have enough space for them on campus.
So for more than 10 years, they lived out at the Riverside campus.
We lived on campus, which tended to further alienate the two groups.
When we got this new building in the mid-90s, about 1995, for the first time, all of anthropology was together in one building.
And it has done a lot for trying to put things back together.
The only other thing that I think I could really add of importance here is that we got our PhD in 1989, but the important thing was that at that time they were only willing to give it to us in the field of archaeology.
And the reason, of course George was happy, because nautical archaeology would come under that.
We were a little disappointed because we had programs in cultural and physical and folklore.
But we were willing to take whatever they'd give us.
And so we accepted that in 1989.
And it wasn't until about 1990, oh boy, late 90s, like 95 or 96, around the time we moved into our new building, that...
we finally got the coordinating board to agree to expand that to include cultural anthropology and physical anthropology, but not folklore.
We still did not have the authority to give a PhD in folklore.
So now we can
give a PhD in anthropology with a specialization in archaeology and all of its evrons and we can do it in physical and in cultural but not in folklore.
The only other thing that has really changed, remember I said to George Bass way back in about 1980 or
or 1979, got his hackles up over the things we were doing in anthropology and got his nautical archaeology program with a separate budget.
Well, throughout my entire administration, I had to live with that in the sense that I was always responsible for what George did and nautical, but I never had the power to really do a whole lot.
And in addition to that phone call I got from Keith Bryant, I got some phone calls from other people at various times because George had this tendency to sometimes fire off letters when he was in a bad mood, which he later would regret sending.
Anyway, but nevertheless.
The current dean, Dr. Woodrow Jones, decided several years ago that he wanted to reunify anthropology and put it all back together the way it should have been in the very beginning.
The reason he felt he could get away with this was two things.
First of all, George Bass is nearing retirement, and in fact the rumor is that he will retire
at the end of this year, meaning at the end of December, January 1st of 2001.
And Dean Jones also felt that it would be appropriate
that I had been department head for a long time, but that they should have a new department head.
So after serving from 1983 until 1999, I left the department as department head.
And David Carlson, who I had hired in 1980 to come in and do the Cultural Resource Management Lab, which he did so effectively, became the new department head effective
September 1 of 1999 last fall and at that time the budgets for nautical and anthropology were all collapsed into one budget so now finally the thing that I had pleaded for for 20 years happened and it's all back together again with a new department a new department head and
and everything is rolling along as usual.
So as far as where anthropology is going to go in the future, well, of course we have the 2020 plan and we would like to believe that we will be in the top 10 like the university would like to be by the year 2020.
We're doing what we can with the resources that we have available to proceed in that direction.
Right now, as far as I'm concerned, and as an individual, I'm, you know, just a regular professor again, which, in fact, I am enjoying because I now have more time to spend with my students.
I currently have eight doctoral students.
And, in fact, in my tenure at Texas A&M, I added them up the other day.
I've graduated 31 PhDs since I've been here.
That's more than one a year.
So, anyway, where are some of those scattered nowadays?
Well, one of them is teaching at the University of Arkansas, one is teaching at the University of Nebraska, one is teaching at the University of Maine at Orono.
A number of them are privately employed doing what we call contract work.
In other words, they have set themselves up as individuals that do research primarily
pollen or in paleoethnobotany, they look at materials for archaeologists and then charge them a fee as the service they perform.
Others are, of course, not all of these were in anthropology.
Some of them were botanists, some of them were botany, one was in geography, two in geography, some were in geology.
I should have said chair or co-chaired.
The several of them in geology or one of them is high up in a big corporation down in Houston and I can't remember which one is an oil corporation.
I think it's Exxon really.
Let's see.
One of them, of course, works for the USDA.
And they're scattered out.
Not all of them are gainfully employed in anthropology or even in botany.
But one of them works for a dental hygiene corporation as the head of training.
It trains dental hygienists.
Another one is, how about this, another one is running a massage parlor in Austin.
So it varies, but anyway.
What advice would you give to the department for today and the future if you were hired as their consultant?
In other words, if I came in and was asked to evaluate things and say,
Well, one of the things that we have always had trouble with, and that is that although we have been on the forefront of multiculturalism, we have not yet succeeded in hiring either
a Hispanic or an Afro-American.
We've tried on a number of occasions but for one reason or another we've either not had the resources to do such or we have not been able to attract them to the physical environment of living in College Station.
I think that would help our image for one thing and would help our cultural anthropology program.
I think that we're doing a good job in
nautical archaeology.
We're the only university in the world that offers a doctoral program in which you can specialize in nautical archaeology.
And we certainly do have a collection of students, more than about 59 or 60 graduate students, last time I counted,
in nautical archaeology, and many of these come from foreign countries as well as from the United States.
There's not a great market for nautical archaeologists, but nevertheless we have a lot of people that are doing this.
Certainly we have set the pace in environmental archaeology, and I think we're still doing a very good job in this area.
We could, in fact, we are trying to expand into the areas of physical and cultural.
I guess the only thing is to just try to stay abreast of what's going on in the world and try to meet the challenges that will place our graduate students in a good position for employment.
Certainly the high-tech revolution is here,
I know some of the faculty have been, had to be dragged into the high-tech world while others are out in the front of doing this.
We have recently embarked on a program with the Conservation Research Laboratory.
We have the first two patents in the College of Liberal Arts, which have been awarded to faculty members in our college, Wayne Smith and Donny Hamilton.
And this all has to do with a new technique of preservation using silicon as opposed to other commodities.
In the past, they've generally used various kinds of, oh, they call it PEG, polyethylene glycol, the various kinds of preservatives in the past.
But more recently, they've discovered that silicon is a very good preservative.
We've got two patents on this process, which we think will be adopted by laboratories and commercial enterprises all over the world.
So it's still in its infancy, but I think that this has a very bright future.
So anthropology at A&M is...
It's good.
It's not the best.
Of course, the big problem, as you well know, and most of us know, and that is that reputations take a long time to develop, and they also take a long time to dissipate.
There are some universities in the United States which have far exceeded their prime.
and yet are still looked upon as highly respected universities, even though their faculty and their facilities have decayed quite rapidly.
And there are other institutions, which have been rising very quickly
But when they go out to survey, they don't get mentioned because the people they survey are generally people that have graduated from the old-time institution.
So, in essence, what I'm saying is I think we're better than what people think we are.
Would we, are, have there been any, are there any national rankings of anthropology programs?
Yes.
There are several national rankings, and we're not ranked on any one of them.
This could be for several reasons.
First of all, most of these rankings are based strictly on doctoral performance.
The fact that we entered the doctoral program in 1989.
Okay, so we're so new.
And the fact that we didn't even get our PhD in cultural or physical until the mid-90s.
And most of these things are based on the last 10 years.
Sure.
So quite honestly, I don't even think that we would be qualified.
for even being considered to be ranked until maybe the next 10 years or so.
In the Southwest, who else does doctoral programs?
Well, you can get a doctorate in anthropology at the university, well, LSU University.
They have a combined Department of Geography and Anthropology.
University of Arkansas offers a PhD in Anthropology.
University of New Mexico and also New Mexico State offers PhDs in Anthropology.
Those would be, I mean you go over to Arizona, you've got Flagstaff offers it, that's Arizona's, that's Northern Arizona, Arizona State and Tempe does and so does the University of Arizona.
That's a big area too.
So then of course Colorado and so forth.
You know, we can, except for Arizona, University of Arizona Tucson, I think we're very competitive with all the rest of those that I've named.
University of Arizona Tucson has long been considered in the top five.
And then in Texas, the University of Texas, and are we competitive with all the others in Texas?
Well, again, it depends on what you want to rank.
If you're going to rank us by cultural anthropology, University of Texas has us hands down.
Sure.
Or linguistics.
If you're ranking us by archaeology, I think we could very easily be ranked number one in archaeology because we have more archaeologists.
We do more archaeology.
We have more diverse faculty that teach archaeology.
Certainly in Nautical, there is no competition whatsoever.
And then compared to the others in the state, then we would be ahead of the SMU, Houston, Rice?
I would say so, yeah, particularly in archaeology.
I think, I really believe, and I'm not saying that just because I'm here at A&M, but I really think in terms of archaeology, we should be ranked number one.
Have, are there some women on the faculty in the anthropology program?
Yes.
The fourth faculty member we hired was a woman.
It was Cynthia Gillette.
She came from Cornell University.
She stayed here for about five years, married a political scientist, and then they both left.
Oh.
Anyway, then later on, we were fortunate to get Sylvia Greider, who had been in the Department of English, and we got her moved over.
She was a folklorist in English, and we got her moved from English over to anthropology.
Then we hired Kathy Detweiler, who is a nutritionist, physical anthropologist.
And more recently, we've hired Lori Wright, who is a physical anthropologist.
So we currently have three women on the faculty, which has helped.
And in fact, we just hired, I'm sorry, we just hired a new faculty member who will start in September.
I got her name.
But anyway, we just hired her this summer.
Now what have we left out that you had on your
I really, the only thing that, the only other thing that I think I would mention is that
Remember, I said that way back when I was a graduate student and working on my Ph.D., Ralph Selecki, who was then chair of the department at Columbia University, and invited me to go to Lebanon and work with him in Lebanon, and I had turned it down.
But Ralph Selecki and I became good friends, and every time I'd go to New York to visit my wife's relatives, I would stop by Columbia University, and we would have lunch and chat and everything.
So over the next 10, 15 years, we became good friends.
When he retired from Columbia University in 1988, right around 1988, he was looking for a place to go.
He asked if maybe Texas A&M might be interested in having him come down.
Now, who is Ralph Selecki?
Well, Ralph Selecki wrote the book on Neanderthals.
He excavated a site in Iraq.
called Shenandar in 1940, late 1940s, where they found more Neanderthal skulls than they had ever found anywhere else in the world.
And even today, it still stands as probably the most important Neanderthal site ever.
And of course, it's in Iraq now.
It's not, you can't get back to it.
But anyway, so he wrote the book on Neanderthals and is really world famous.
So I invited him to come to Texas A&M as an adjunct faculty member, he and his wife.
His wife is also a Ph.D., Rose Slecki, S-O-L-E-C-K-I.
She is a specialist in the, well, the Neolithic period, really, farming, early farming period.
He's a specialist in the Paleolithic, Middle Paleolithic Neanderthals.
So they came down here in 1978 or 2009 and brought with them
eight tons of lithic material from Shenandoah.
We still have the biggest collection of Neanderthal tools anywhere in the world.
Well, I shouldn't say anywhere in the world.
Baghdad has the other half of the collection.
But anyway, outside of Iraq anyway.
And Selecky stayed here up until last fall in September of last year.
After being here for 10 years, he and his wife decided that they were getting up in years.
and wanted to go back to Pennsylvania where their children live and where their grandchildren live and wanted to spend the rest of their years up there playing grandfather and grandmother.
And so they really enjoyed their 10 years here at Texas A&M, contributed a lot to our program, certainly gave us good name recognition.
They were on a number of graduate committees.
They taught courses.
And they gave us their intertall collection, so that's really the only other big thing that I might have left out.
Let's see, did any outsider, meaning campus administrator, board member, state official, somebody else ever try to intervene in the department?
Tell them what to do, where to go.
The only incident that I honestly can think of was that one case where I told you about Ordon Ordon and the monkey, where somebody had written to the president.